 
   5.0 
       This is a computer program that uses GENOPT and BIGBOSOR4
       to find the optimum arrangement of struts and the optimum
       design of struts within that arrangement that support the
       propellant tank. The tank is carried by a booster that
       imparts a certain ultimate peak axial acceleration and a
       certain ultimate peak lateral acceleration. The minimum free
       vibration frequency must be greater than some specified
       value. The tank is assumed to be either cylindrical with
       domed ends or spherical. It is made of isotropic material.
       It may have locally thickened regions and stiffening rings
       to handle the concentrated loads applied by the struts.
        
       The three parts of the propellant tank (1. aft dome, 2.
       cylindrical middle, 3. forward dome) have internal orthogrid
       stiffening that is "smeared out" in all the BIGBOSOR4 models.
       In the BIGBOSOR4 models the smeared orthogrid stiffeners are
       treated as an orthotropic layer of constant thickness. The
       tank wall is modeled as consisting of three layers:
       Innermost layer: smeared orthogrid of thickness equal to
       the height of the orthogrid stiffeners and stiffness and
       density equal to the tank wall material "E" & "rho" multiplied
       by (orthogrid stiffener thickness)/(stiffener spacing)
       Middle layer: constant thickness that may differ in each
       of the three parts of the propellant tank
       Outer layer: variable thickness that represents tapered
       doublers attached to the outer wall of the propellant tank
       centered on axial locations where supporting struts are
       attached to external rings that are part of the tank.
       The BIGBOSOR4 shell wall type, NWALL = 9, is used in order
       to simulate this three-layered construction. NWALL = 9 is
       the BIGBOSOR4 option for a layered orthotropic wall in
       which one or more of the layers may have thickness that
       varies along the meridian.
        
       In the free vibration BIGBOSOR4 model the mass of the fluid
       in the tank is "lumped" into the constant-thickness middle
       layer of the three-layered orthotropic wall. For the
       cylindrical part of the propellant tank the "effective"
       wall skin density, rho(add), to be added to the material
       density is obtained from the relationship:
       (cylindrical tank volume)xrho(propellant) =
       (volume occupied by shell wall skin)xrho(add)
       or, for a cylindrical shell:
       pi x r^2 x L x rho(propellant) = 2 x pi x r x L x t x rho(add)
       which leads to rho(add) = 0.5 x r/t x rho(propellant)
       For a spherical dome, we have:
       (4/3) x pi x r^3 x rho(propellant) = 4 x pi x r^2 x t x rho(add)
       which leads to rho(add) = 0.333 x r/t x rho(propellant)
        
       There may be struts attached to the tank at a number of axial
       locations. At each of these axial locations there are n sets
       of two struts each. In each pair of two struts, one strut has a
       positive azimuthal angle and the other strut has an equal
       negative azimuthal angle. These positive and negative azimuthal
       angles are the same for each of the n sets of struts at that
       particular axial coordinate of the tank wall.
        
       All the struts at a given axial coordinate are attached
       to the same external ring, which is part of the propellant
       tank. All the struts at a given axial coordinate are
       attached to "ground" (the launch vehicle, assumed to be
       rigid in this model) at the same (different) axial coordinate.
       Therefore, all the struts at the given "ground" axial
       coordinate have the same inclination or declination angle.
        
       There may be different numbers of strut pairs at different
       axial locations. The plus and minus azimuthal angles and
       inclination or declination angles in each group of struts,
       that is, at each axial location may differ.
        
       For each strut at a given axial location one end of the
       strut is attached to the propellant tank and the
       other end of the strut is connected to "ground", in which
       "ground" means the (rigid) launch vehicle that carries the
       propellant tank. There is no launch vehicle model in this
       study.
        
       To summarize:
       1. There may be up to 3 axial locations at which structs
       are attached to the propellant tank and to ground.
       2. At each axial location all the attachment points of the
       struts to the tank have the same axial coordinate; the struts
       are attached to the propellant tank along a ring.
       3. The other ends of these struts are attached to "ground"
       at the same axial location (in general different from the
       axial location of the tank-end of these struts).
       4. There are n(i) strut pairs at each axial location
       in which i corresponds to a particular axial location.
       n(1), n(2), n(3)... may differ from eachother.
        
       The arrangement of struts that support a tank is analogous
       to that described in the paper:
       David Bushnell, "Improved optimum design of dewar supports",
       Computers & Structures, Vol. 29, No. 1, pp. 1-56, 1988
        
       In that paper the quantity n = 3, that is, there are
       three strut pairs at each of one or two axial locations.
        
       Much of the terminology in the present work is "borrowed"
       from the "dewar" paper just cited.
 
  10.1 acceleration of gravity: GRAV
  10.2 
       Example: 386.4 inches/sec^2
 
 
  15.0 
       There are many variables with role types 1 and 2 (role type 1
       means a decision variable candidate; role type 2 means a
       constant that is not an environmental variable such as a load
       and that is not a behavioral variable, an allowable, or a
       factor of safety.
        
       The role type 1 and role type 2 variables are organized
       as follows:
       1. The launch vehicle diameter: DIAVEH
        
       2. The propellant tank dimensions and properties:
       AFTDIA = diameter of the aft dome of the tank
       AFTHI  = height of the aft dome of the tank
       FWDDIA = diameter of the forward dome of the tank
       FWDHI  = height of the forward dome of the tank
       FLTANK = axial distance from the aft dome apex to the
       forward dome apex
       ZAPEX  = global axial coordinate of the aft dome apex
       DENPRP = weight density of the propellant
       ZCG    = global axial coordinate of the tank center of gravity
       THKAFT = thickness of the tank aft dome skin
       THKMID = thickness of the tank cylinder skin
       THKFWD = thickness of the forward tank dome skin
       STRSPC = spacing of the internal tank orthogrid stringers
       RNGSPC = spacing of the internal tank orthogrid rings
       STRTHK = thickness of the tank orthogrid stringers
       STRHI  = height of the tank orthogrid stringers
       RNGTHK = thickness of the tank orthogrid rings
       RNGHI  = height of the tank orthogrid rings
       ETANK  = Young's modulus of the cold tank
       NUTANK = Poisson's ratio of the tank material
       DENTNK = mass density of the tank material
       ALTNK  = coefficient of thermal expansion of the tank material
        
       3. Orientation of the propellant tank in the launch vehicle:
       IAXIS  = 1 means tank is vertical; 2 means tank is horizontal
        
       4. Propellant tank support rings:
       IZTANK = tank strut support ring number
       ZTANK  = global axial coordinate of a tank support ring
       ZGRND  = global axial coordinate of "ground" (launch vehicle)
       for all the struts attached at ZTANK
        
       5. Dimensions of strut types:
       STRTYP = index for type of strut arrangement and struts
       INPAIRS= strut type number
       NPAIRS = number of strut pairs for strut type INPAIRS
       FITTNK = length of strut end fitting attached to tank
       FEATNK = axial "EA" stiffness of strut end fitting at tank
       ALFITT = coefficient of thermal expansion of strut end
       fitting attached to the tank
       FITVEH = length of strut end fitting attached to "ground"
       FEAVEH = axial "EA" stiffeness of "ground" strut end fitting
       ALFITV = coefficient of thermal expansion of strut end
       fitting attached to "ground"
       ATANK  = circumferential angle (degrees) to pinned end of
       the first strut attached to the tank
       AGRND  = circumferential angle (degrees) to pinned end of
       the first strut attached to "ground" (launch vehicle)
       IDTUBE = inner diameter of the strut support tube that is
       active during the launch phase of the mission
       ODINNR = outer diameter of the orbital tube assembly that
       is located inside the strut support tube (PODS)
       FLINNR = length of the "folded" orbital tube assembly
       NTUBES = number of tubes in the PODS folded tube concept
       ISTRUT = index for simple strut (1) or PODS strut (2)
        
       6. Properties of the propellant tank reinforcement
       corresponding to each tank reinforcement type:
       RNGTYP = propellant tank reinforcement type
       IDUBAXL= reinforcement type number
       DUBAXL = axial length of the propellant tank tapered doubler
       that is centered on each propellant tank support ring
       DUBTHK = maximum thickness of the tapered propellant tank doubler
       TRNGTH = thickness of the propellant tank support ring
       TRNGHI = height of the propellant tank support ring
       TRNGE  = hoop modulus of the propellant tank support ring
       ALRNGT = coefficient of thermal expansion of the tank ring
        
       7. Properties of the walls of the composite strut tubes:
       JWALTYP= 1 means launch tube; 2 means orbital tube
       IWALTYP= strut wall type number
       WALTYP = type of laminated composite strut wall
       ITHICK = index for type of unidirectional composite ply
       THICK  = thickness of lamina of type ITHICK
       ANGLE  = layup angle of lamina of type ITHICK
       MATTYP = material type of lamina of type ITHICK
       JLAYTYP= wall type number
       ILAYTYP= layer number
       LAYTYP = layer type index for layer number ILAYTYP and
       wall type number JLAYTYP
        
       8. Properties of composite material of which the launch tubes
       are fabricated:
       IE1    = material type number
       E1     = modulus in the fiber direction in material type IE1
       E2     = modulus transverse to fibers in material type IE1
       G12    = in-plane shear modulus of material type IE1
       NU     = minor Poisson ratio of material type IE1
       G13    = x-z out-of-plane shear modulus in material type IE1
       G23    = y-z out-of-plane shear modulus in material type IE1
       ALPHA1 = coefficient of thermal expansion along fibers
       ALPHA2 = coefficient of thermal expansion transverse to fibers
       TEMTUR = curing delta temperature in material type IE1
       COND1  = conductivity along the fibers in material type IE1
       COND2  = conductivity transverse to fibers in material IE1
       DENSTY = weight density of material type IE1
        
       9. Elements that are used in the expression for the objective:
       WGT    = weighting coefficient used in the expression for
       the objective:
       objective = WGTx(normalized empty tank mass)
       + (1-WGT)x(normalized total strut conductance)
       TNKNRM = normalizing empty tank mass
       CONNRM = normalizing total strut conductance
        
       10. Mission phase index:
       IPHASE = 1 means launch  phase of the mission
       IPHASE = 2 means orbital phase of the mission
 
  20.1 diameter of launch vehicle: DIAVEH
  20.2 
       Diameter of the launch vehicle
       The launch vehicle must have a larger diameter than the
       propellant tank, of course, because it carries the propellant
       tank. The propellant tank end of the struts are located on
       a ring the centroidal diameter of which is equal to the
       diameter of the aft dome plus 2 x ECCR, in which ECCR is
       the radial eccentricity of the strut support ring attached
       to the propellant tank.
 
 
  25.0 
       The supported mass, what is called here "the tank", is assumed
       to have domed ends with elliptical cross sections. You will be
       asked to provide the height and diameter of each of the two domed
       ends. This information is needed later to ascertain whether or
       not the struts clear the domes and the diameters of the support
       rings that are attached to the tank.
       Next, you will be asked to provide the diameter of the aft
       dome of the tank.
 
  30.1 diameter of the aft dome of the tank: AFTDIA
  30.2 
       This is the length of the major axis of the ellipsoidal dome.
 
  35.1 height of the aft dome of the tank: AFTHI
  35.2 
       This is the length of the semi-minor axis of the ellipsoidal dome.
 
  40.1 diameter of the forward dome of the tank: FWDDIA
  40.2 
       This is the length of the major axis of the ellipsoidal dome.
       In most cases FWDDIA will be equal to AFTDIA and the middle
       part of the tank connecting the aft and forward domes will
       be cylindrical.
 
  45.1 height of the forward dome of the tank: FWDHI
  45.2 
       This is the length of the semi-minor axis of the ellipsoidal dome.
 
  50.1 axial dist. from aft dome apex to fwd dome apex: FLTANK
  50.2 
       FLTANK is needed in order to determine if the attachment
       points of the struts to the tank are located within the aft or
       forward domes. NOTE: So far in this study it is assumed that
       no struts are attached to either end dome of the propellant
       tank. All sets of struts are attached to the cylindrical
       part of the propellant tank.
 
  55.1 global axial coordinate of the aft dome apex: ZAPEX
  55.2 
       This quantity is needed in order to determine if the attachment
       points of the struts to the tank are located within the aft
       or forward domes of the tank.
 
  60.1 weight density of the propellant: DENPRP
  60.2 
       e.g. weight density of aluminum is 0.1 lb/in^3
       Examples: LH2 = 4.43 lb/ft^3 = 0.00256366 lb/in^3
       LOX = 71.3 lb/ft^3 = 0.0412616 lb/in^3
 
  65.1 global axial coordinate of the tank cg: ZCG
  65.2 
       "cg" = center of gravity
 
  70.1 thickness of the tank aft dome skin: THKAFT
  70.2 
       The thickness is assumed to be constant. It is the middle
       layer of the BIGBOSOR4 three-layered NWALL=9 model of the
       tank wall, in which the inner layer represents the smeared
       orthogrid stiffeners and the outer layer represents the
       tapered doublers. The middle layer of thickness THKAFT is
       the layer into which is "lumped" the propellant mass.
 
  75.1 thickness of the tank cylinder skin: THKMID
  75.2 
       This thickness is constant. This is the thickness into
       which is "lumped" the propellant mass.
 
  80.1 thickness of the forward tank dome skin: THKFWD
  80.2 
       This thickness is constant. This is the thickness into
       which is "lumped" the propellant mass.
 
 
  85.0 
       All three parts of the tank wall (domes & cyl.) are stiffened
       internally in what is called an "orthogrid" style. There are
       internal rings and stringers of rectangular cross sections.
       The orthogrid stiffeners are "smeared out" in all the models
       used in this study. The "smeared" orthogrid is modeled as
       the innermost layer of the tank wall in the BIGBOSOR4 model.
       The decision variable candidates associated with this internal
       smeared grid stiffening are:
       1. STRSPC = spacing of the stringers (axial stiffeners)
       2. RNGSPC = spacing of the rings
       3. STRTHK = stringer thickness (dimension parallel to skin)
       4. STRHI = stringer height (dimension normal to skin)
       5. RNGTHK = ring thickness (dimension parallel to skin)
       6. RNGHI = ring height (dimension normal to skin)
       RNGHI should be equal to STRHI.
        
       This internal orthogrid is smeared out in models of the
       propellant tank. The smeared orthogrid is treated as the
       innermost layer (layer 1) of the propellant tank wall.
       The properties of the propellant tank wall are formatted
       in the NWALL = 9 option of BIGBOSOR4. NWALL = 9 means
       "layered orthotropic wall in which one or more of the
       layers has thickness that varies along the meridian".
       The thickness of the smeared orthogrid layer is equal to
       the height of the orthogrid stringers and rings, and the
       "effective" moduli, E1 and E1, and density are equal to the
       stiffness and density of the material muliplied by
       (stiffener thickness)/(stiffener height).
        
       NOTE: There are two types of rings that enter this model:
       1. The internal rings that are part of the orthogrid
       stiffening, and
       2. The external rings to which the support struts are
       attached. Please don't get them confused!
 
  90.1 spacing of the tank orthogrid stringers: STRSPC
  90.2 
       "Stringers" are meridionally oriented stiffeners. the
       spacing is in the circumferential direction. The fact that
       in the two domes the circumferential spacing of meridional
       stiffeners varies from base to apex of a dome is ignored.
       In the model the internal orthogrid is smeared and the
       spacing at the equator of the dome is used for the entire
       dome. A dome could possibly be fabricated in which this
       is approximately true.
 
  95.1 spacing of the tank orthogrid rings: RNGSPC
  95.2 
       The orthogrid is smeared out in all models and is treated
       as if it were Layer No. 1 in a two-layered orthotropic
       tank (NWALL = 9 in BIGBOSOR4 jargon).
 
 100.1 thickness of the tank orthogrid stringers: STRTHK
 100.2 
       This is the dimension measured parallel to the tank skin.
 
 105.1 height of the tank orthogrid stringers: STRHI
 105.2 
       This is the dimension measured normal to the tank skin. It
       is the dimension from the inner surface of the tank skin to
       the tip of the stringer
 
 110.1 thickness of the tank orthogrid rings: RNGTHK
 110.2 
       This is the dimension of the internal ring stiffener measured
       parallel to the tank skin. NOTE: the "tank ring" we are
       referring to here is one of the regularly spaced internal
       rings that form part of the internal orthogrid stiffening
       on the cylindrical part of the propellant tank, not one
       of the external rings to which the support struts are attached.
 
 115.1 height of the tank orthogrid rings: RNGHI
 115.2 
       Note that here we are referring to part of the orthogrid
       stiffening inside the wall of the propellant tank, not one
       of the external rings to which the support struts are attached.
       RNGHI should be equal to STRHI.
 
 
 120.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide the material properties
       of the propellant tank. Use the material properties that
       are appropriate when the tank is filled with cryogen.
 
 125.1 Young's modulus of the cold tank material: ETANK
 125.2 
       Make sure to use the properties that hold for the propellant
       tank in its cold condition, that is, after it has been
       filled with cryogen.
 
 130.1 Poisson's ratio of the tank material: NUTANK
 130.2 
       Example: 0.3 for aluminum.
 
 135.1 mass density of the tank material: DENTNK
 135.2 
       For example, aluminum has DENTNK = 0.00025 lb/in^3
 
 140.1 coef.thermal expansion of tank material: ALTNK
 140.2 
       What is wanted here is the average coefficient of thermal
       axial expansion between the bottom & top propellant tank
       support rings. The thermal axial contraction between these
       rings is included in the stress and buckling analyses of the
       supporting struts. Units of ALTNK are "per degree xxx". The
       temperature difference between the portion of the propellant
       tank between the two tank support rings must afterward be given
       in units consistent with the coefficient of thermal axial
       expansion, of course.
 
 
 145.0 
       Next, you will be asked whether the propellant tank
       is oriented axially or lying on its side in the launch
       vehicle. This orientation is specified by the value of
       an integer, IAXIS, being 1 or 2:
       IAXIS = 1 means that the axis of the propellant tank is
       aligned with the axis of the launch vehicle.
       IAXIS = 2 means that the axis of the propellant tank is
       oriented 90 degrees from the axis of the launch vehicle.
 
 150.1 tank is vertical (1) or horizontal (2): IAXIS
 150.2 
       IAXIS = 1 means that the axis of the propellant tank is
       aligned with the axis of the launch vehicle.
       IAXIS = 2 means that the axis of the propellant tank is
       oriented at 90 degrees with respect to the axis of the
       launch vehicle.
 
 
 155.0 
       The tank is assumed to be supported by up to 3 sets
       of struts arrayed in a manner similar to that shown in Fig. 1
       of the paper, "Improved Optimum Design of Dewar Supports",
       Computers & Structures, Vol. 29, No. 1, pp. 1-56, 1988. Each
       set of struts contains 2 x n(i) identical pin-ended members,
       arranged in n(i) pairs spaced at 360/n(i) angles in the azimuthal
       plane. One subset of n(i) is "clockwise slanting" and the other
       subset of n(i) is "anticlockwise slanting" by the same
       amount. The pin-ended member may be a simple tube or a tube
       with a disconnect system (PODS). Each strut has end fittings
       at each end of lengths, FITTNK and FITVEH. Each strut is
       assumed to be pinned at each of its two ends.
        
       For each set of tank supports you will be asked to provide
       the following input data:
       1. The axial locations and properties of the structural
       rings to which the propellant-tank-ends of the struts
       are attached. These rings are part of the propellant tank.
       2. The axial lengths of tapered doublers added to the
       propellant tank wall that are centered on the line of attachment
       of the propellant tank support ring to the tank shell.
       3. The maximum thicknesses of these tapered reinforcing doublers.
       4. Thermal expansion coefficients of the
       tank and the tank support rings.
       5. The locations (azimuthal angles) of both ends of one of the
       n "anticlockwise slanting" struts. These angles are called
       ADEWP and AVACP in Fig. 1 of the 1988 dewar paper cited above.
       6. The lengths of end fittings by means of which the pin-ended
       struts are attached to the support rings (FITTNK, FITVEH)
       7. The axial stiffness, "EA", of the end fittings (FEATNK,
       FEAVEH)
       8. Diameters of the tubes in a strut (IDTUBE, ODINNR)
       9. For each tube in a support strut:
       9.1 number of layers through the tube thickness
       9.2 layer type indicator for each layer
       9.3 For each new layer type;
       9.3.1 thickness
       9.3.2 winding (layup) angle
       9.3.3 material type indicator
       10. Material properties for each material type. The strut
       tubes are fabricated of laminated composite material.
        
       Next, you will see the prompt:
       "Number IZTANK  of rows in the array  ZTANK: IZTANK"
       Want is wanted is the number of axial locations at which
       struts are to be attached to the propellant tank.
       With long propellant tanks IZTANK should probably be 2
       With spherical or ellipsoidal tanks a choice of IZTANK = 1
       might be best.
 
 160.1 Number IZTANK  of rows in the array  ZTANK: IZTANK 
 165.1 global axial coordinate of tank support ring: ZTANK
 165.2 
       Must be a positive number. Use the attachment line of the
       tank support ring to the tank as the reference measure, not
       the ring centroidal axis.
       NOTE: IF THERE IS ONLY ONE SET OF 2 x n STRUTS, PUT ZTANK
       AT AN AXIAL STATION NEAR THE LOCATION OF THE TANK C.G.
       ANOTHER NOTE: Do not put the ring exactly at the apex of the
       tank dome. If the ring is in the dome make sure that it is
       some distance from the dome apex. If it is at the apex a
       singularity will occur and the computations will be meaningless.
 
 170.1 global axial coordinate of "ground": ZGRND
 170.2 
       This is the global axial coordinate of the end of a strut
       that is connected to "ground", that is, the end of a strut
       that is connected to the launch vehicle, which is assumed
       to be rigid in this study..
 
 
 175.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide the strut types for
       each set of struts. A set of struts is associated with
       as axial location. You may, for example, have 10 sets of
       struts located at 10 different axial locations, but some
       of these sets of struts have strut types that are the same.
       A "strut type" is associated with a bundle of variables.
       Associated with a given "strut type" is the following
       "bundle" of variables:
       NPAIRS = number of strut pairs attached to the propellant
       tank support ring
       ATANK and AGRND = angles of the propellant tank end and the
       launch vehicle end of the first strut in the set of struts
       FITTNK, FEATNK, ALFITT, FITVEH, FEAVEH, ALFITV = lengths,
       "EA" axial stiffnesses, and coefficients of thermal expansion
       of the strut end fittings at the propellant tank end of the
       strut (FITTNK, FEATNK and ALFITT) and at the "ground"
       (launch vehicle) end of the strut (FITVEH, FEAVEH
       and ALFITV)
       IDTUBE, FACLEN, DTSUP, ODINNR, FLINNR, NTUBES, ISTRUT =
       inner diameter of strut launch tube, factor by which to
       reduce the length of strut tube used in the model for
       buckling of the strut tube as a shell, average strut
       temperature minus ambient (room) temperature,
       Outer diameter of the inner orbital tube, length of the
       orbital tube assembly, number of "folded" tubes in the
       orbital tube assembly, and type of strut (simple or
       compound (PODS).
 
 180.1 type of strut arrangement: STRTYP
 180.2 
       You must provide STRTYP for each strut set axial location
 
 
 185.0 
       Next, you will be asked to give the number of strut pairs
       at each axial level. NPAIRS can differ at each axial level.
       In the research that
       led to the 1988 "dewar" paper cited above NPAIRS was fixed at 3.
       Here we are allowed any number of strut pairs greater than or
       equal to 3 (NPAIRS must be greater than or equal to 3).
        
       A "strut pair" consists of one strut with a clockwise slant
       and the other strut with an equal anticlockwise slant. See
       Fig. 1 of the 1988 "dewar" paper for an example in which
       NPAIRS = 3, which means that there are six struts at each
       of possibly two axial locations. Here we can have up to
       10 axial locations and the number of strut pairs can differ
       at each axial level.
        
       Next, you will see the prompt:
       "Number INPAIRS of rows in the array  NPAIRS: INPAIRS"
       What is wanted is the number of different strut types.
       For large propellant tanks with a cylindrical part of
       significant length, you will probably want INPAIRS = 2
       INPAIRS = 2 means two strut types. These two different
       strut types correspond respectively to the set of struts
       attached nearer the aft end of the propellant tank (strut
       type 1) and the set of struts attached nearer the forward
       end of the propellant tank (strut type 2). In this work
       all struts attached at a given propellant tank support
       ring are always of the same type. With "aft" and "forward"
       sets of struts the strut types are different at the two
       axial locations mainly because each of the two sets of
       struts is slanted differently. Even if the laminates in
       all struts are the same, the strut types are different
       because of the different slanting in each of the two sets.
 
 190.1 Number INPAIRS of rows in the array  NPAIRS: INPAIRS
 195.1 number of strut pairs: NPAIRS
 195.2 
       Next, you will be asked to give the number of strut pairs
       at each axial level. NPAIRS can differ at each axial level.
       In the research that led to the 1988 "dewar" paper
       cited above NPAIRS was fixed at 3. Here we are
       allowed any number of strut pairs greater than or
       equal to 3 (NPAIRS must be greater than or equal to 3).
        
       A "strut pair" consists of one strut with a clockwise slant
       and the other strut with an equal anticlockwise slant. See
       Fig. 1 of the 1988 "dewar" paper for an example in which
       NPAIRS = 3, which means that there are six struts at each
       of possibly two axial locations. Here we can have up to
       10 axial locations and the number of strut pairs can differ
       at each axial level.
 
 
 200.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide data relative to the
       strut fittings at the propellant tank end of a strut
       (length of end fitting = FITTNK, axial "EA" stiffness of
       end fitting = FEATNK, coefficient of thermal expansion of end
       fitting = ALFITT) and at the launch vehicle end of a strut
       (length of end fitting = FITVEH, axial "EA" stiffness of
       end fitting = FEAVEH, coefficient of thermal expansion of end
       fitting = ALFITV).
       For a sketch of a strut, see the upper right part
       of Fig. 1 of the 1988 "dewar" paper cited above.
 
 205.1 length of end fitting attached to tank ring: FITTNK
 205.2 
       This end fitting has axial stiffness "EA" and has infinite
       conductivity. You should use as this length the distance
       between the point at which the strut is pinned to the
       propellant tank support ring and point along the strut where
       the elastic composite strut tube begins.
 
 210.1 axial "EA" stiffness of tank-end strut fitting: FEATNK
 210.2 
       This is the axial stiffness of the end fitting at the end
       of the strut attached to the propellant tank support ring.
       The fitting "spring" constant is K = EA/L, in which EA
       is the axial stiffness of the end fitting and L is the
       axial length of the end fitting, FITTNK.
 
 215.1 Coef.of thermal expansion of tank end fitting: ALFITT
 215.2 
       What is wanted here is the coefficient of thermal expansion,
       alpha = ALFITT, of the end fitting that is pinned to the
       propellant tank support ring.
 
 220.1 length of strut end fitting attached to "ground": FITVEH
 220.2 
       This end fitting has axial stiffness "EA" and has infinite
       conductivity. You shuold use as this length the distance
       between the point at which the strut is pinned to the
       launch vehicle ("ground") and the point along the strut
       where the composite strut tube begins.
 
 225.1 axial "EA" stiffness of "ground" end strut fitting: FEAVEH
 225.2 
       This is the axial stiffness of the end fitting at the end
       of the strut attached to the launch vehicle ("ground"). The
       end fitting "spring" constant is K = EA/L, in which EA is
       the axial stiffness of the end fitting and L is the axial
       length of the end fitting, FITVEH.
 
 230.1 coef.of thermal expan. of "ground" end fitting: ALFITV
 230.2 
       What is wanted here is the coefficient of thermal expansion,
       alpha = ALFITV, for the strut end fitting that is pinned to
       "ground" (pinned to the launch vehicle).
 
 
 235.0 
       This set of 2 x NPAIRS support struts is arranged in two
       subsets of NPAIRS each. The NPAIRS members of the first
       subset are spaced at 360/NPAIRS-degree intervals and slant
       anticlockwise between the propellant tank (called "dewar"
       in Fig. 1 of the 1988 "dewar" paper) and the launch vehicle
       (called "vacuum shell" in the "dewar" paper) as viewed from
       the forward (fwd) end of the propellant tank. The first
       strut in this subset of NPAIRS struts is pinned to the
       propellant tank support ring at a circumferential angle
       called ATANK (called ADEWP in the 1988 "dewar" paper). This
       first strut is pinned to the launch vehicle (called "vacuum
       shell support ring" at a circumferential angle called AGRND
       (called AVACP in the "dewar" paper). See Fig. 1 of the 1988
       "dewar" paper).
        
       The NPAIRS struts in the second subset are spaced at
       360/NPAIRS degrees and slant clockwise by the same amount
       (THETA in Fig. 1) that the first set slants anticlockwise.
       The frst strut in this second subset of NPAIRS struts is
       pinned to the propellant tank support ring at a circumferential
       angle equal to -ATANK.
        
       In Fig. 1 of the "dewar" paper The first subset of NPAIRS = 3
       "anticlockwise" slanting struts are labelled 1, 2, and 3 in
       the top view in Fig. 1. The second subset of NPAIRS = 3
       "clockwise" slanting struts are labelled 4, 5, and 6.
        
       NOTE: THE RECOMMENDED VALUE OF ATANK: 15.0 degrees.
 
 240.1 circ.angle (deg.) to pinned tank end of strut: ATANK
 240.2 
       Must be positive and less than 60 degrees. This angle is
       measured from the x-axis shown in Fig. 1 of the "dewar"
       paper. You might try 15 deg.
 
 245.1 circ.angle to pinned "ground" end of strut: AGRND
 245.2 
       Must be positive. If NPAIRS = 3 you might try a starting
       value, AGRND = ATANK + 45 degrees
 
 
 250.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide input relating
       to the strut tubes: IDTUBE, FACLEN, DTSUP, ODINNR, FLINNR,
       NTUBES and ISTRUT:
       IDTUBE = inner diameter of support tube active during launch
       FACLEN = factor less than unity used to reduce the length
       of the composite strut tube analyzed for shell buckling.
       DTSUP  = average strut temperatue - ambient (room) temp.
       ODINNR = outer diameter of tube assembly active during
       launch hold and in orbit
       FLINNR = length of the orbital tube assembly
       NTUBES = number of "folded" tubes in orbital tube assembly
       ISTRUT = index for type of strut: 1=simple; 2=PODS
 
 255.1 inner diam. of support tube active at launch: IDTUBE
 255.2 
       This is the inner diameter of the outermost support tube,
       the tube through which all loads pass during the launch
       phase of the mission.
 
 
 260.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide a factor by which
       the strut launch tube length is to be multiplied for the
       analysis of buckling of the launch tube as a shell. This
       factor, called FACLEN, should be less than unity, probably
       something like 0.02 - 0.2. The purpose is to obtain shell
       buckling load factors that have converged with respect to
       nodal point density. Most strut launch tubes have a rather
       high length/diameter, something like 5 - 50. Shell buckling
       usually occurs with an axial wavelength that is smaller than
       a shell diameter, sometimes much smaller than a shell diameter.
       Therefore, in order to obtain a converged value for the critical
       shell buckling load factor one needs to analyze a rather short
       sub-length of the strut tube. The factor, FACLEN, accomplishes
       this.
 
 265.1 length factor for strut buckling as a shell: FACLEN
 265.2 
       Set  0.02 < FACLEN < 0.2
 
 270.1 Average strut temperature minus ambient: DTSUP
 270.2 
       What is wanted is the difference, DTSUP, between the average
       temperature of the support strut after the propellant tank
       has been filled with cryogenic material, and the ambient
       temperature. This will be a negative number. Use temperature
       units consistent with the value of ALSUP just provided by
       you.
 
 275.1 outer diam.of the orbital tube assembly: ODINNR
 275.2 
       This is the outer diameter of the orbital tube assembly,
       the "folded" tube assembly through which all loads pass
       during the orbital and launch-hold phases of the mission.
 
 280.1 Length of the orbital tube assembly: FLINNR
 280.2 
       This is the length of the orbital tube assembly,
       the "folded" tube assembly through which all loads pass
       during the orbital and launch-hold phases of the mission.
       If there are two tubes in the orbital tube assembly
       ("folded" orbital tube concept), FLINNR is the length
       of one of the tubes. The length of the other orbital
       tube is assumed to be the same. In the "folded" orbital
       tube concept this computer program accounts for the
       fact that there are two tubes through use of the input
       datum, NTUBES, which you will next provide.
 
 285.1 Choose 1 or 2 tubes in the orbital tube assembly: NTUBES
 285.2 
       You must choose NTUBES = 1 or 2 . With NTUBES = 2 the orbital
       tube assembly is a "folded" tube concept, which may reduce
       the conductivity of the support system in orbit by providing
       a longer path from propellant tank to "ground" (launch vehicle)
       than with NTUBES = 1. With NTUBES = 2 the strut is softer
       because the effective spring length of the folded tube is
       twice that of the single orbital tube. (NOTE: the two
       "folded" tubes are assumed to be of the same length, FLINNR,
       and to have the same wall construction. One of these
       two orbital tubes fits inside the other.
 
 
 290.0 
       Next, you will be asked what type of struts support the
       propellant tank. You have two choices:
       1. ISTRUT = 1 means the strut is a simple composite tube
       with end fittings.
       2. ISTRUT = 2 means the strut has an orbital disconnect
       feature. The compound strut has the main composite tube
       active during the launch phase plus a disconnect "folded"
       tube active during launch-hold or in orbit. This smaller
       "inner" tube or tube bundle is near the cold (propellant
       tank) end of the strut. It has a much smaller conductance
       than the main tube active during launch (the outer tube)
       which has a larger cross section area and which is, on the
       average, warmer than the "orbital" tube or tube bundle.
 
 295.1 index for simple strut (1), "PODS" strut (2): ISTRUT
 295.2 
       ISTRUT = 1 means that the support strut is a simple laminated
       composite tube with end fittings.
       ISTRUT = 2 means that the support strut is a compound strut
       with a laminated composite tube active during launch and
       a much smaller composite laminated tube or tube bundle
       ("folded tube") active during launch hold and in orbit.
 
 
 300.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide an index for
       the type of wall construction (type of composite laminate)
       associated with the struct type, STRTYP. All struts attached
       to a given propellant tank ring have the same wall type.
       Sets of struts at different propellant tank rings may have
       different composite layups, that is, different wall types.
 
 305.1 type of wall constructions in strut type STRTYP: WALTYP
 305.2 
       Probably the struts at different axial levels will have the
       same wall type, but struts at different levels MAY have
       different wall types, that is, different composite layups.
 
 
 310.0 
       You will next be asked to provide the cross-section
       dimensions of an external ring with tee-shaped cross section
       to be attached to the cylindrical portion of the propellant
       tank at its midlength. You will be asked to provide the
       height and thickness of the web and the height and thickness
       of the outstanding flange. These are decision variable
       candidates.
 
 315.1 height of mid-tank T-ring web: WEBHI
 315.2 
       This is the distance measured from the outer surface of
       the wall of the propellant tank to the middle surface of
       the outstanding flange of the T-shaped external ring.
 
 320.1 thickness of mid-tank T-ring web: WEBTHK
 325.1 width (height) of mid-tank T-ring flange: FLGHI
 330.1 thickness of mid-tank T-ring flange: FLGTHK
 
 335.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide the propellant tank
       reinforcement type. A given propellant tank reinforcement
       type is associated with the following "bundle" of properties:
       1. the doubler length and max. thickness: DUBAXL and DUBTHK
       2. the ring cross section properties: ring thickness (TRNGTH),
       ring height (TRNGHI), ring elastic modulus (TRNGE), and
       ring coefficient of thermal expansion (ALRNGT).
 
 340.1 propellant tank reinforcement type: RNGTYP
 340.2 
       The propellant tank reinforcement type is associated with
       the bundle of tapered doubler and discrete ring properties.
 
 
 345.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide the axial lengths of doublers
       associated with each propellant tank support ring. The propellant
       tank end of each strut is associated not only with a propellant
       tank support ring but also with a region in the neighborhood
       of this ring where the propellant tank is thicker than elswhere
       because of a tapered doubler added to the outside of the
       propellant tank skin.
        
       You will next see the following prompt:
       "Number IDUBAXL of rows in the array  DUBAXL: IDUBAXL"
       What is wanted is the number of different reinforcement types.
       In most cases IDUBAXL should probably be 1
 
 350.1 Number IDUBAXL of rows in the array  DUBAXL: IDUBAXL
 355.1 axial length of the propellant tank doubler: DUBAXL
 355.2 
       This is the axial length of the axisymmetric doubler
 
 360.1 max.thickness of the propellant tank doubler: DUBTHK
 360.2 
       The tapered doubler is centered at the axial location of
       the propellant tank support ring with which it is associated.
       The maximum thickness, DUBTHK, of the tapered doubler occurs
       at the same axial location as the external discrete ring.
       This is the additional thickness to be added to the nominal
       tank thickness that exists in regions remote from each
       propellant tank support ring. In axial regions where
       tapered doublers exist the BIGBOSOR4 tank wall model has
       three layers: innermost layer = smeared orthogrid; middle
       layer = tank skin of thickness, THKAFT or THKMID or THKFWD;
       outermost layer = tapered doubler.
 
 
 365.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide properties of the
       external rings to which the propellant tank end of the
       support struts are attached. You will be asked for the
       following:
       TRNGTH = thickness of the propellant tank support ring
       TRNGHI = height of the propellant tank support ring
       You must provide these two properties of the propellant
       tank support rings for each propellant tank reinforcement
       type. The propellant tank support rings have rectangular
       cross sections.
       TRNGE = elastic modulus of the propellant tank support ring
       ALRNGT = coefficient of thermal expansion of the ring
 
 370.1 thickness of the tank reinforcement ring: TRNGTH
 370.2 
       This ring is part of the propellant tank reinforcement
       The propellant tank end of the strut is attached to the
       centroid of this ring, which has a rectangular cross section.
       TRNGTH is the dimension of the ring measured parallel to the
       tank skin. The ring is attached to the outer surface of the
       tank skin. (Not the outer surface of the doubler, but the
       outer surface of the part of the tank skin of thickness
       THKMID.)
 
 375.1 height of the tank reinforcement ring: TRNGHI
 375.2 
       TRNGHI is the dimension of the ring measured normal to the
       tank skin.
 
 380.1 hoop modulus of the tank ring: TRNGE
 380.2 
       The hoop modulus is the stiffness/area of the tank support
       ring in units, for example, of lb/in**2.
 
 385.1 coef.of thermal expansion of the tank ring: ALRNGT
 385.2 
       What is wanted here is the coefficient of thermal radial
       expansion of the propellant tank support ring. The thermal
       radial contraction of each propellant tank support ring is
       included in the stress and buckling analyses of the supporting
       struts. Units of ALRNGT are "per degree xxx". Use consistent
       units for this quantity and the temperature difference you
       will be asked for below.
 
 
 390.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide thickness types,
       layup angle types, and material types. These quantities
       are the "building blocks" of the laminated composite walls
       that form the strut launch tubes and the strut orbital tubes.
       THICK = thickness corresponding to a layer index
       ANGLE = layup angle corresponding to a layer index
       MATTYP = material type corresponding to a layer index.
       THICK, ANGLE, and MATTYP form a triad that corresponds
       to a given layer index.
       The layer indices are stored in a matrix, LAYTYP(i,j),
       in which i = the layer number in a laminate and j = a
       wall type number.
        
       You will next see the prompt:
       "Number ITHICK of rows in the array THICK: ITHICK"
       What is wanted is the number of different layer indices
       that point to a unique triad, (THICK,ANGLE,MATTYP). For
       example, suppose you have a laminated composite wall with
       ply layup given by [0,+45,-45,90,90,-45,+45,0]total. In
       this example ITHICK = 4 (4 unique triads) because each of
       the first four layers in the symmetric 8-layered laminate
       has a different layup angle. You would provide the following:
       ITHICK = 4
       THICK(i), i=1,4 = 0.01, 0.01, 0.01, 0.01 (for example, and
       to be provided by you one datum at a time)
       ANGLE(i), i=1.4 = 0., 45., -45., 90. (one datum at a time)
       MATTYP(i),i=1,4 = 1, 1, 1, 1 (one datum at a time)
 
 395.1 Number ITHICK  of rows in the array  THICK: ITHICK 
 400.1 thickness of a lamina: THICK
 400.2 
       It is possible to have multiple adjacent plies of the same
       thickness type (same thickness index).
 
 405.1 layup angle: ANGLE
 405.2 
       Please provide the layup angle in degrees
 
 410.1 Material type: MATTYP
 410.2 
       Thickness, Layup angle, and Material type form a triad that
       corresponds to a layer type, or a layer index. Composite
       laminated walls consist of a group of layer types. The
       thickness and layup angle of the layer type can be selected
       by the user as decision variables. They are called "decision
       variable candidates".
 
 
 415.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide a matrix of layer types
       corresponding to each wall type.
       LAYTYP(ILAYTYP,JLAYTYP) = layer type(layer no., walltype no.)
       Suppose you have the following laminate stacking sequence:
       [0,+45,-45,90,90,-45,+45,0]total. Then, for wall type no. 1
       you would want LAYTYP(i,1) to be as follows:
       LAYTYP(i,1), i=1,8 = 1, 2, 3, 4, 4, 3, 2, 1
        
       You will next see the two prompts:
       "Number JLAYTYP of columns in the array, LAYTYP: JLAYTYP"
       "Number ILAYTYP of rows in this column of LAYTYP: ILAYTYP"
       JLAYTYP is the number of wall types and ILAYTYP is the number
       of layers in the laminate.
       Following the prompts for JLAYTYP and ILAYTYP, you will be
       prompted to provide the layer types, LAYTYP. Corresponding
       to the example of the laminate with 8 layers, you would provide:
       LAYTYP(i,1), i=1,8 = 1, 2, 3, 4, 4, 3, 2, 1
       one datum at a time.
 
 420.1 Number JLAYTYP of columns in the array, LAYTYP: JLAYTYP
 425.1 Number ILAYTYP of rows in this column of LAYTYP: ILAYTYP
 430.1 layer type index: LAYTYP
 430.2 
       For example, LAYTYP(7,3) is the layer index for layer number 7
       wall type number 3. The integer, LAYTYP(i,j) points to a
       specific triad: thickness, layup angle, material type.
 
 
 435.0 
       Next, you will be asked to supply material properties for
       an orthotropic ply of composite material. You will be asked
       to provide the following for each material type:
        
       E1 = modulus in the fiber direction
       E2 = modulus transverse to fibers in the plane of the layey
       G12 = in-plane shear modulus
       NU = Poisson's ratio: NU = NU12 = NU21 x E2/E1
       NOTE: The NU you provide is the smallest of the two if
       E1 > E2. This is a bit unusual, so BEWARE!
       G13 = transverse shear modulus for shear in a plane normal
       to the fibers
       G23 = transverse shear modulus for shear in a plane parallel
       to the fibers.
        
       For an isotropic material just use E1 = E2; G12 = E1/[2(1+NU)]
       G13 = G23 = G12
        
       ALPHA1 = coefficient of thermal expansion along fibers
       ALPHA2 = coefficient of thermal expansion transverse to fibers
       TEMTUR = residual stress temperature (curing delta temperature)
       COND1 = thermal conductivity along fibers
       COND2 = thermal conductivity transverse to fibers
        
       You will next see the prompt:
       "Number IE1     of rows in the array  E1: IE1"
       What is wanted is the number of different material types.
       In the example given above in which there is an 8-layered
       symmetric laminate, there is only one material type, that is,
       MATTYP(i), i=1,4 = 1, 1, 1, 1  In this example you would
       provide IE1 = 1
 
 440.1 Number IE1     of rows in the array  E1: IE1    
 445.1 modulus in the fiber direction: E1
 450.1 modulus transverse to fibers: E2
 455.1 in-plane shear modulus: G12
 460.1 small Poisson's ratio: NU
 460.2 
       This is unusual, so BEWARE! NU is the small Poisson's
       ratio if E1 > E2, which is almost always the case.
       NU = NU12 = NU21 x E2/E1
 
 465.1 x-z out-of-plane shear modulus: G13
 465.2 
       Ths is the transverse shear modulus governing shear stiffness
       normal to the laminate in a plane normal to the fibers. For
       unidirectional tape you might use a value equal to or close
       to the in-plane shear modulus, G12.
 
 470.1 y-z out-of-plane shear modulus: G23
 470.2 
       This is the transverse shear modulus governing shear stiffness
       normal to the laminate in a plane parallel to the fibers. For
       unidirectional tape you might use a value equal or close to
       the in-plane shear modulus, G12.
 
 475.1 coef.of thermal expansion along fibers: ALPHA1
 480.1 coef.of thermal expan.transverse to fibers: ALPHA2
 485.1 curing delta temperature (positive): TEMTUR
 485.2 
       This is the temperature difference between the temperature
       at which the material sets and the ambient (room) temperature,
       that is, the temperature difference that gives rise to residual
       stresses from curing the composite laminate. Use TEMTUR = 0
       if you wish to neglect the effect of curing residual stresses.
 
 490.1 conductivity along the fibers: COND1
 490.2 
       This is the conductivity along the fibers in a unidirectional
       ply of a composite laminate.
 
 495.1 conductivity transverse to fibers: COND2
 495.2 
       This is the conductivity transverse to the fibers in a unidirectional
       ply that is a layer in a composite laminate.
 
 500.1 weight density of the material: DENSTY
 500.2 
       e.g. aluminum = 0.1 lb/in^3
       many composite materials have DENSTY = 0.057 lb/in^3
 
 
 505.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide a variable
       called "WGT". This variable plays a role in the definition
       of the objective:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(normalized empty tank mass)
       + (1.0 - WGT)*(normalized conductance of support system)
       After you provite WGT you will be asked to provide the
       normalizing values of empty tank mass and total
       conductance of all the supporting struts.
 
 510.1 objective=WGT*(empty tank mass) +(1-WGT)*(conductance): WGT
 510.2 
       WGT is a "weighting" variable by means of which the
       objective is defined.
       In general, the objective is defined as:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(normalized empty tank mass)
       +(1.-WGT)*(normalized total strut conductance)
       If WGT = 0.0 the objective is given by:
       OBJECTIVE = (total strut conductance)
       You will next be asked to provide two variables:
       1. TNKNRM = the normalizing quantity for empty tank mass
       2. CONNRM = the normalizing quantity for total strut conductance
       With WGT > 0.0 the objective will be as follows:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(empty tank mass)/TNKNRM
       +(1.-WGT)*(total strut conductance)/CONNRM
 
 515.1 normalizing empty tank mass: TNKNRM
 515.2 
       In general, the objective is defined as:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(normalized empty tank mass)
       +(1.-WGT)*(normalized total strut conductance)
       If WGT = 0.0 the objective is given by:
       OBJECTIVE = (total strut conductance)
       You will next be asked to provide two variables:
       1. TNKNRM = the normalizing quantity for empty tank mass
       2. CONNRM = the normalizing quantity for total strut conductance
       With WGT > 0.0 the objective will be as follows:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(empty tank mass)/TNKNRM
       +(1.-WGT)*(total strut conductance)/CONNRM
 
 520.1 normalizing total strut conductance: CONNRM
 520.2 
       In general, the objective is defined as:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(normalized empty tank mass)
       +(1.-WGT)*(normalized total strut conductance)
       If WGT = 0.0 the objective is given by:
       OBJECTIVE = (total strut conductance)
       You will next be asked to provide the variable:
       CONNRM = the normalizing quantity for total strut conductance
       With WGT > 0.0 the objective will be as follows:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(empty tank mass)/TNKNRM
       +(1.-WGT)*(total strut conductance)/CONNRM
 
 
 525.0 
       Next, provide the index for mission phase:
       IPHASE = 1 means launch phase
       IPHASE = 2 means orbital phase
       In the orbital phase the conductance is lower than in the
       launch phase because the heat must flow through both the
       launch tube and the inner orbital tube assembly in series.
 
 530.1 IPHASE=1=launch phase; IPHASE=2=orbital phase: IPHASE
 530.2 
       help for IPHASE
 
 
 535.0 
       Next, provide the environment seen by the filled propellant
       tank. This environment has the following components:
       1. ullage pressure, PRESS, in the propellant tank
       2. quasi-static axial g-loading in gees, GAXIAL
       3. quasi-static lateral g-loading in gees, GLATRL
       4. propellant tank cool-down in the launch-hold condition
       5. launch vehicle temperature in the launch-hold condition
       6. average cool-down of each strut in the launch-hold condition
       and during launch
       7. propellant tank cool-down in the orbital condition
       8. launch vehicle temperature in the orbital condition
       9. average cool-down of each strut in the orbital condition
        
       You will next see the following prompt:
       "Number NCASES  of load cases (environments): NCASES"
       Each case corresponds to a "bundle" of loads: ullage
       pressure, PRESS, axial g-loading, GAXIAL, lateral g-loading,
       GLATRL, and propellant tank cool-down delta temperature,
       TNKCOOL. It is probably best to optimize with NCASES = 2
       For example, in Load Case 1 you might have:
       PRESS = 24, GAXIAL = 10., GLATRL = 0., TNKCOOL = -200
       In load Case 2 you might have:
       PRESS = 24, GAXIAL = 0., GLATRL = 10., TNKCOOL = -200
 
 540.1 Number NCASES  of load cases (environments): NCASES 
 545.1 propellant tank ullage pressure: PRESS
 545.2 
       The propellant tank is internally pressurized in addition
       to the pressure head provided by the propellant.
 
 550.1 quasi-static axial g-loading: GAXIAL
 550.2 
       Provide the ultimate axial g-loading to be seen by the
       propellant tank.
 
 555.1 quasi-static lateral g-loading: GLATRL
 555.2 
       Provide the ultimate resultant lateral g-loading to be seen
       by the propellant tank.
 
 560.1 propellant tank cool-down from cryogen: TNKCOOL
 560.2 
       This is the temperature decrease after the tank has been
       filled with cryogen.
 
 
 565.0 
       The responses (behaviors) include the following:
       1. four vibration modes and frequencies:
       a. axial vibration
       b. rolling vibration
       c. lateral-pitching vibration mode 1
       d. lateral-pitching vibration mode 2
        
       2. maximum stress components in the composite laminates:
       a. maximum tensile stress along the fibers of a ply
       b. maximum compressive stress along the fibers of a ply
       c. maximum tensile stress transverse to the fibers in a ply
       d. maximum compressive stress transverse to the fibers in a ply
       e. maximum in-plane shear stress in a ply
       f. maximum vonMises effective stress if the material is isotropic
        
       3. column buckling of a strut
       4. shell buckling of a strut launch tube
       5. force in a strut in the launch-hold condition
       6. maximum effective stress in the propellant tank
       7. buckling of the propellant tank
        
       You will next see the prompt:
       "Number JFREQ   of columns in the array, FREQ: JFREQ"
       JFREQ is the number of free vibration frequencies to be
       computed for the tank/strut system. In this study JFREQ is
       must always be equal to 4   There are two free vibration
       modes corresponding to n = 0 circumferential waves: one
       corresponding to rolling and the other corresponding to
       axial translation of the strut-supported propellant tank.
       There are two free vibration modes corresponding to n = 1
       circumferential wave: both corresponding to a combination
       of lateral translation and pitching of the propellant tank.
 
 570.1 Number JFREQ   of columns in the array, FREQ: JFREQ  
 575.0 free vibration frequency (cps): FREQ
 575.2 
       Four vibration modes are important:
       1. axial vibration [axisymmetric (n=0) vibration mode]
       2. rolling vibration [axisymmetric (n=0) vibration mode]
       3. lateral-pitching mode 1 (vibration with n = 1 circ. wave)
       4. lateral-pitching mode 2 (vibration with n = 1 circ. wave)
 
 580.1 minimum allowable frequency (cps): FREQA
 580.2 
       Typically the minimum allowable frequency during the launch
       phase of the mission is significantly higher than the minimum
       allowable frequency in orbit.
 
 585.1 factor of safety for freqency: FREQF
 585.2 
       One suggestion would be a factor of safety of something
       like 1.2.
 
 
 590.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide behavioral variables
       relating to stress in the laminated composite strut tubes.
       For a unidirectional composite ply there are 5 stress
       components that are important:
       1. tensile stress along fibers
       2. compressive stress along fibers
       3. tensile stress transverse to fibers
       4. compressive stress transverse to fibers
       5. in-plane shear stress
       The ply can fail if the allowable stress for any one
       or more of these stress components is exceeded.
        
       You will next see the prompt:
       "Number JSTRES1 of columns in the array, STRES1: JSTRES1"
       What is wanted is the number of stress components, which
       must always be 5 in this GENOPT application. Enter "5"
       when you are presented with this prompting phrase.
 
 595.1 Number JSTRES1 of columns in the array, STRES1: JSTRES1
 600.0 maximum stress in material 1: STRES1
 600.2 
       The six possible stress components are:
       1. tensile stress along fibers
       2. compressive stress along fibers
       3. tensile stress transverse to fibers
       4. compressive stress transverse to fibers
       5. in-plane shear stress
       6. vonMises effective stress (in isotropic material)
 
 605.1 maximum allowable stress in material 1: STRES1A
 610.1 factor of safety for stress, matl 1: STRES1F
 610.2 
       Generally use a factor of safety between 1.0 and 1.5.
 
 615.0 maximum stress in material 2: STRES2
 615.2 
       In an analogous manner to the behavior, STRES1, there are
       six component of stress in the array, STRES2. The only
       difference here is that we are concerned with material type
       2 instead of material type 1.
 
 620.1 maximum allowable stress in material 2: STRES2A
 625.1 factor of safety for stress, matl 2: STRES2F
 625.2 
       Generally use a factor of safety between 1.0 and 1.5.
 
 630.0 maximum stress in material 3: STRES3
 630.2 
       In an analogous manner to the behaviors, STRES1 and STRES2,
       there are six components of stress in the array, STRES3. The
       only difference here is that we are concerned with material
       type 3 instead of material type 1 or material type 2.
       NOTE: Three different materials may be used as a device
       in order to permit the computation of maximum stresses in
       different parts of the structure. For example, we will want
       to compute the maximum stress components in strut types
       1 and 2 and also in the orbital tubes in a "pods" strut
       application. The materials out of which these various
       parts of the structure are made might all be the same
       composite material. However, we pretend that different
       parts of the structure are made of different materials
       in order to compute stress margins for different parts
       of the structure.
 
 635.1 maximum allowable stress in material 3: STRES3A
 640.1 factor of safety for stress, matl 3: STRES3F
 640.2 
       Generally use a factor of safety between 1.0 and 1.5.
 
 645.1 Number JCOLBUK of columns in the array, COLBUK: JCOLBUK
 650.0 buckling of a strut as a column: COLBUK
 650.2 
       This is the Euler buckling phenomenon.
 
 655.1 allowable for column buckling of strut: COLBUKA
 655.2 
       Always set COLBUKA = 1.0
 
 660.1 factor of safety for Euler strut buckling: COLBUKF
 660.2 
       Generally use a factor of safety between 1.0 and 1.5.
 
 665.0 buckling of strut as a shell: SHLBUK
 665.2 
       The shell buckling mode is a short-axial-wavelength mode
       compared to the axial wavelength of the column buckling mode.
       The critical shell buckling mode usually has multiple wave
       around the circumference of the launch tube part of the strut.
 
 670.1 allowable for shell buckling of strut: SHLBUKA
 670.2 
       Always set SHLBUKA = 1.0
 
 675.1 factor of safety for shell buckling of strut: SHLBUKF
 675.2 
       Generally use a factor of safety of about 2.0 in order to
       account for the inevitable presence of initial imperfection
       in the cylindrical tube portion of the strut active during
       the launch phase of the mission.
 
 680.0 launch-hold force in a strut: FORCE
 680.2 
       During lauch-hold a compound strut, that is, a strut that
       has both a launch tube and a "folded" orbital tube, has a
       "disconnect" feature (a gap) that must remain open during
       the launch-hold phase and during the orbital phase of a
       mission. If FORCE is less than the allowable force, then
       this gap remains open, and the conductance of heat into the
       propellant tank from the launch vehicle remains small.
 
 685.1 maximum allowable launch-hold force in strut: FORCEA
 685.2 
       Consult the maker of "disconnect" struts for what the
       maximum allowable launch-hold/orbital FORCE should be.
 
 690.1 factor of safety for launch-hold force: FORCEF
 690.2 
       Generally use a factor of safety between 1.0 and 1.5.
 
 695.0 maximum stress in the propellant tank: TNKSTR
 695.2 
       It is assumed here that the propellant tank is made of
       isotropic material with a single layer in the shell wall.
 
 700.1 allowable for propellant tank stress: TNKSTRA
 700.2 
       Conult the experts for what this maximum allowable stress
       should be.
 
 705.1 factor of safety for tank stress: TNKSTRF
 705.2 
       Use a factor of safety between 1.0 and 2.0
 
 710.0 propellant tank buckling load factor: TNKBUK
 710.2 
       The propellant tank can buckle in various ways:
       1. Buckling of the internally pressurized ellipsoidal
       dome at the bottom of the propellant tank
       2. Buckling due to local compressive membrane stresses in
       the neighborhoods of where the struts "poke at" the
       propellant tank.
 
 715.1 allowable for propellant tank buckling: TNKBUKA
 715.2 
       Always set TNKBUKA = 1.0
 
 720.1 factor of safety for tank buckling: TNKBUKF
 720.2 
       Generally use a factor of safety between 1.0 and 1.2
 
 
 725.0 
       In this study the objective is a weighted average of the
       normalized empty tank mass and the normalized total conductance:
       objective = WGTxTOTMAS/TNKNRM +(1-WGT)xCONDCT/CONNRM
       in which TOTMAS is the empty tank mass, TNKNRM is a user-
       provided normalizing empty tank mass, CONDCT is the total
       conductance of heat into the propellant tank and CONNRM is
       the normalizing total conductance.
       This compound objective is to be minimized subject to the
       responses (behaviors) identified previously.
 
 730.0 WGTxTOTMAS/TNKNRM +(1-WGT)xCONDCT/CONNRM: CONDCT
 999.0 DUMMY ENTRY TO MARK END OF FILE
