 
   5.0 
       This is a computer program that uses GENOPT and BIGBOSOR4
       to find the optimum design of advanced laminated composite
       skirts that support the
       propellant tank. The tank is carried by a booster that
       imparts a certain ultimate peak axial acceleration and a
       certain ultimate peak lateral acceleration. The minimum free
       vibration frequency must be greater than some specified
       value. The tank is assumed to be either cylindrical with
       domed ends. It is made of isotropic material.
       It may have locally thickened regions and stiffening rings
       to handle the concentrated loads applied by the skirts.
        
       The three parts of the propellant tank (1. aft dome, 2.
       cylindrical middle, 3. forward dome) have internal orthogrid
       stiffening that is "smeared out" in all the BIGBOSOR4 models.
       In the BIGBOSOR4 models the smeared orthogrid stiffeners are
       treated as an orthotropic layer of constant thickness. The
       tank wall is modeled as consisting of three layers:
       Innermost layer: smeared orthogrid of thickness equal to
       the height of the orthogrid stiffeners and stiffness and
       density equal to the tank wall material "E" & "rho" multiplied
       by (orthogrid stiffener thickness)/(stiffener spacing)
       Middle layer: constant thickness that may differ in each
       of the three parts of the propellant tank
       Outer layer: variable thickness that represents tapered
       doublers attached to the outer wall of the propellant tank
       centered on axial locations where supporting skirts are
       attached to external rings that are part of the tank.
       The BIGBOSOR4 shell wall type, NWALL = 9, is used in order
       to simulate this three-layered construction. NWALL = 9 is
       the BIGBOSOR4 option for a laminated composite wall in
       which one or more of the layers may have thickness that
       varies along the meridian.
        
       In the free vibration BIGBOSOR4 model the mass of the fluid
       in the tank is "lumped" into the constant-thickness middle
       layer of the three-layered orthotropic wall. For the
       cylindrical part of the propellant tank the "effective"
       wall skin density, rho(add), to be added to the material
       density is obtained from the relationship:
       (cylindrical tank volume)xrho(propellant) =
       (volume occupied by shell wall skin)xrho(add)
       or, for a cylindrical shell:
       pi x r^2 x L x rho(propellant) = 2 x pi x r x L x t x rho(add)
       which leads to rho(add) = 0.5 x r/t x rho(propellant)
       For a spherical dome, we have:
       (4/3) x pi x r^3 x rho(propellant) = 4 x pi x r^2 x t x rho(add)
       which leads to rho(add) = 0.333 x r/t x rho(propellant)
        
       There are laminated composite skirts attached to the tank
       at one or two axial locations.
 
  10.1 acceleration of gravity: GRAV
  10.2 
       Example: 386.4 inches/sec^2
 
 
  15.0 
       There are many variables with role types 1 and 2 (role type 1
       means a decision variable candidate; role type 2 means a
       constant that is not an environmental variable such as a load
       and that is not a behavioral variable, an allowable, or a
       factor of safety.
        
       The role type 1 and role type 2 variables are organized
       as follows:
       1. The launch vehicle diameter: DIAVEH
        
       2. The propellant tank dimensions and properties:
       AFTDIA = diameter of the aft dome of the tank
       AFTHI  = height of the aft dome of the tank
       FWDDIA = diameter of the forward dome of the tank
       FWDHI  = height of the forward dome of the tank
       FLTANK = axial distance from the aft dome apex to the
       forward dome apex
       ZAPEX  = global axial coordinate of the aft dome apex
       DENPRP = weight density of the propellant
       ZCG    = global axial coordinate of the tank center of gravity
       THKAFT = thickness of the tank aft dome skin
       THKMID = thickness of the tank cylinder skin
       THKFWD = thickness of the forward tank dome skin
       STRSPC = spacing of the internal tank orthogrid stringers
       RNGSPC = spacing of the internal tank orthogrid rings
       STRTHK = thickness of the tank orthogrid stringers
       STRHI  = height of the tank orthogrid stringers
       RNGTHK = thickness of the tank orthogrid rings
       RNGHI  = height of the tank orthogrid rings
       ETANK  = Young's modulus of the cold tank
       NUTANK = Poisson's ratio of the tank material
       DENTNK = mass density of the tank material
       ALTNK  = coefficient of thermal expansion of the tank material
        
       3. Orientation of the propellant tank in the launch vehicle:
       IAXIS  = 1 means tank is vertical; 2 means tank is horizontal
        
       4. Propellant tank support rings:
       IZTANK = tank skirt support ring number
       ZTANK  = global axial coordinate of a tank support ring
       ZGRND  = global axial coordinate of "ground" (launch vehicle)
       for skirt attached at ZTANK
        
       5. Dimensions of skirt types:
       SKRTYP = index for the type of skirt
       LNGTNK1 = tank-end length of one-layered skirt part
       THKTNK1  = tank-end thickness of tapered skirt part
       LNGTNK2  = tank-end length of tapered prongs
       THKTNK2  = tank-end thickness of one tapered prong
       LNGVEH1  = "ground" end length of one-layered skirt part
       THKVEH1  = "ground"-end thickness of tapered skirt part
       LNGVEH2  = "ground"-end length of tapered prongs
       THKVEH2  = "ground"-end thickness of one tapered prong
        
       6. Properties of the propellant tank reinforcement
       corresponding to each tank reinforcement type:
       RNGTYP = propellant tank reinforcement type
       IDUBAXL= reinforcement type number
       DUBAXL = axial length of the propellant tank tapered doubler
       that is centered on each propellant tank support ring
       DUBTHK = maximum thickness of the tapered propellant tank doubler
       TRNGTH = thickness of the propellant tank support ring
       TRNGHI = height of the propellant tank support ring
       TRNGE  = hoop modulus of the propellant tank support ring
       ALRNGT = coefficient of thermal expansion of the tank ring
        
       7. Properties of the walls of the composite skirts:
       JWALTYP= 1 means launch skirt; 2 means orbital skirt
       IWALTYP= skirt wall type number
       WALTYP = type of laminated composite skirt wall
       ITHICK = index for type of unidirectional composite ply
       THICK  = thickness of lamina of type ITHICK
       ANGLE  = layup angle of lamina of type ITHICK
       MATTYP = material type of lamina of type ITHICK
       JLAYTYP= wall type number
       ILAYTYP= layer number
       LAYTYP = layer type index for layer number ILAYTYP and
       wall type number JLAYTYP
        
       8. Properties of composite material of which the launch skirts
       are fabricated:
       IE1    = material type number
       E1     = modulus in the fiber direction in material type IE1
       E2     = modulus transverse to fibers in material type IE1
       G12    = in-plane shear modulus of material type IE1
       NU     = minor Poisson ratio of material type IE1
       G13    = x-z out-of-plane shear modulus in material type IE1
       G23    = y-z out-of-plane shear modulus in material type IE1
       ALPHA1 = coefficient of thermal expansion along fibers
       ALPHA2 = coefficient of thermal expansion transverse to fibers
       TEMTUR = curing delta temperature in material type IE1
       COND1  = conductivity along the fibers in material type IE1
       COND2  = conductivity transverse to fibers in material IE1
       DENSTY = weight density of material type IE1
        
       9. Elements that are used in the expression for the objective:
       WGT    = weighting coefficient used in the expression for
       the objective:
       objective = WGTx(normalized empty tank mass)
       + (1-WGT)x(normalized total skirt conductance)
       TNKNRM = normalizing empty tank mass
       CONNRM = normalizing total skirt conductance
        
       10. Mission phase index:
       IPHASE = 1 means launch  phase of the mission
       IPHASE = 2 means orbital phase of the mission
 
  20.1 diameter of launch vehicle: DIAVEH
  20.2 
       Diameter of the launch vehicle
       The launch vehicle must have a larger diameter than the
       propellant tank, of course, because it carries the propellant
       tank. The propellant tank end of the skirts are located on
       the tank reference surface at the axial attachment
       point of a ring the centroidal diameter of which is
       equal to the diameter of the aft dome plus 2 x ECCR,
       in which ECCR is the radial eccentricity of the
       support ring attached to the propellant tank.
 
 
  25.0 
       The supported mass, what is called here "the tank", is assumed
       to have domed ends with elliptical cross sections. You will be
       asked to provide the height and diameter of each of the two domed
       ends.
       Next, you will be asked to provide the diameter of the aft
       dome of the tank.
 
  30.1 diameter of the aft dome of the tank: AFTDIA
  30.2 
       This is the length of the major axis of the ellipsoidal dome.
 
  35.1 height of the aft dome of the tank: AFTHI
  35.2 
       This is the length of the semi-minor axis of the ellipsoidal dome.
 
  40.1 diameter of the forward dome of the tank: FWDDIA
  40.2 
       This is the length of the major axis of the ellipsoidal dome.
       In most cases FWDDIA will be equal to AFTDIA and the middle
       part of the tank connecting the aft and forward domes will
       be cylindrical.
 
  45.1 height of the forward dome of the tank: FWDHI
  45.2 
       This is the length of the semi-minor axis of the ellipsoidal dome.
 
  50.1 axial dist. from aft dome apex to fwd dome apex: FLTANK
  50.2 
       FLTANK is needed in order to determine if the attachment
       points of the skirts to the tank are located within the aft or
       forward domes. NOTE: So far in this study it is assumed that
       no skirts are attached to either end dome of the propellant
       tank. All skirts are attached to the cylindrical part
       of the propellant tank.
 
  55.1 global axial coordinate of the aft dome apex: ZAPEX
  55.2 
       This quantity is needed in order to determine if the attachment
       points of the skirts to the tank are located within the aft
       or forward domes of the tank.
 
  60.1 weight density of the propellant: DENPRP
  60.2 
       e.g. weight density of aluminum is 0.1 lb/in^3
       Examples: LH2 = 4.43 lb/ft^3 = 0.00256366 lb/in^3
       LOX = 71.3 lb/ft^3 = 0.0412616 lb/in^3
 
  65.1 global axial coordinate of the tank cg: ZCG
  65.2 
       "cg" = center of gravity
 
  70.1 thickness of the tank aft dome skin: THKAFT
  70.2 
       The thickness is assumed to be constant. It is the middle
       layer of the BIGBOSOR4 three-layered NWALL=9 model of the
       tank wall, in which the inner layer represents the smeared
       orthogrid stiffeners and the outer layer represents the
       tapered doublers. The middle layer of thickness THKAFT is
       the layer into which is "lumped" the propellant mass.
 
  75.1 thickness of the tank cylinder skin: THKMID
  75.2 
       This thickness is constant. This is the thickness into
       which is "lumped" the propellant mass.
 
  80.1 thickness of the forward tank dome skin: THKFWD
  80.2 
       This thickness is constant. This is the thickness into
       which is "lumped" the propellant mass.
 
 
  85.0 
       All three parts of the tank wall (domes & cyl.) are stiffened
       internally in what is called an "orthogrid" style. There are
       internal rings and stringers of rectangular cross sections.
       The orthogrid stiffeners are "smeared out" in all the models
       used in this study. The "smeared" orthogrid is modeled as
       the innermost layer of the tank wall in the BIGBOSOR4 model.
       The decision variable candidates associated with this internal
       smeared grid stiffening are:
       1. STRSPC = spacing of the stringers (axial stiffeners)
       2. RNGSPC = spacing of the rings
       3. STRTHK = stringer thickness (dimension parallel to skin)
       4. STRHI = stringer height (dimension normal to skin)
       5. RNGTHK = ring thickness (dimension parallel to skin)
       6. RNGHI = ring height (dimension normal to skin)
       RNGHI should be equal to STRHI.
        
       This internal orthogrid is smeared out in models of the
       propellant tank. The smeared orthogrid is treated as the
       innermost layer (layer 1) of the propellant tank wall.
       The properties of the propellant tank wall are formatted
       in the NWALL = 9 option of BIGBOSOR4. NWALL = 9 means
       "layered orthotropic wall in which one or more of the
       layers has thickness that varies along the meridian".
       The thickness of the smeared orthogrid layer is equal to
       the height of the orthogrid stringers and rings, and the
       "effective" moduli, E1 and E1, and density are equal to the
       stiffness and density of the material muliplied by
       (stiffener thickness)/(stiffener height).
        
       NOTE: There are two types of rings that enter this model:
       1. The internal rings that are part of the orthogrid
       stiffening, and
       2. The external rings to which the support skirts are
       attached. Please don't get them confused!
 
  90.1 spacing of the tank orthogrid stringers: STRSPC
  90.2 
       "Stringers" are meridionally oriented stiffeners. the
       spacing is in the circumferential direction. The fact that
       in the two domes the circumferential spacing of meridional
       stiffeners varies from base to apex of a dome is ignored.
       In the model the internal orthogrid is smeared and the
       spacing at the equator of the dome is used for the entire
       dome. A dome could possibly be fabricated in which this
       is approximately true.
 
  95.1 spacing of the tank orthogrid rings: RNGSPC
  95.2 
       The orthogrid is smeared out in all models and is treated
       as if it were Layer No. 1 in a two-layered orthotropic
       tank (NWALL = 9 in BIGBOSOR4 jargon).
 
 100.1 thickness of the tank orthogrid stringers: STRTHK
 100.2 
       This is the dimension measured parallel to the tank skin.
 
 105.1 height of the tank orthogrid stringers: STRHI
 105.2 
       This is the dimension measured normal to the tank skin. It
       is the dimension from the inner surface of the tank skin to
       the tip of the stringer
 
 110.1 thickness of the tank orthogrid rings: RNGTHK
 110.2 
       This is the dimension of the internal ring stiffener measured
       parallel to the tank skin. NOTE: the "tank ring" we are
       referring to here is one of the regularly spaced internal
       rings that form part of the internal orthogrid stiffening
       on the cylindrical part of the propellant tank, not one
       of the external rings to which the support skirts are attached.
 
 115.1 height of the tank orthogrid rings: RNGHI
 115.2 
       Note that here we are referring to part of the orthogrid
       stiffening inside the wall of the propellant tank, not one
       of the external rings to which the support skirts are attached.
       RNGHI should be equal to STRHI.
 
 
 120.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide the material properties
       of the propellant tank. Use the material properties that
       are appropriate when the tank is filled with cryogen.
 
 125.1 Young's modulus of the cold tank material: ETANK
 125.2 
       Make sure to use the properties that hold for the propellant
       tank in its cold condition, that is, after it has been
       filled with cryogen.
 
 130.1 Poisson's ratio of the tank material: NUTANK
 130.2 
       Example: 0.3 for aluminum.
 
 135.1 mass density of the tank material: DENTNK
 135.2 
       For example, aluminum has DENTNK = 0.00025 lb/in^3
 
 140.1 coef.thermal expansion of tank material: ALTNK
 140.2 
       What is wanted here is the average coefficient of thermal
       axial expansion between the bottom & top propellant tank
       support rings. The thermal axial contraction between these
       rings is included in the stress and buckling analyses of the
       supporting skirts. Units of ALTNK are "per degree xxx". The
       temperature difference between the portion of the propellant
       tank between the two tank support rings must afterward be given
       in units consistent with the coefficient of thermal axial
       expansion, of course.
 
 
 145.0 
       Next, you will be asked whether the propellant tank
       is oriented axially or lying on its side in the launch
       vehicle. This orientation is specified by the value of
       an integer, IAXIS, being 1 or 2:
       IAXIS = 1 means that the axis of the propellant tank is
       aligned with the axis of the launch vehicle.
       IAXIS = 2 means that the axis of the propellant tank is
       oriented 90 degrees from the axis of the launch vehicle.
 
 150.1 tank is vertical (1) or horizontal (2): IAXIS
 150.2 
       IAXIS = 1 means that the axis of the propellant tank is
       aligned with the axis of the launch vehicle.
       IAXIS = 2 means that the axis of the propellant tank is
       oriented at 90 degrees with respect to the axis of the
       launch vehicle.
 
 
 155.0 
       The tank is assumed to be supported by up to 2 skirts,
       one attached at the aft end of the cylindrical part of the
       propellant tank and the other attached at the forward end
       of the cylindrical part of the propellant tank.
        
       For each tank support skirts you will be asked to provide
       the following input data:
       1. The axial locations and properties of the structural
       rings to which the propellant-tank-ends of the skirts
       are attached. These rings are part of the propellant tank.
       2. The axial lengths of tapered doublers added to the
       propellant tank wall that are centered on the line of attachment
       of the propellant tank support ring to the tank shell.
       3. The maximum thicknesses of these tapered reinforcing doublers.
       4. Thermal expansion coefficients of the
       tank and the tank support rings.
       5. Lengths and thicknesses pertaining to two short parts
       of each skirt nearest the propellant tank.
       6. Lengths and thicknesses pertaining to two short parts
       of each skirt nearest the launch vehicle ("ground").
       7. For each supporting skirt:
       7.1 number of layers through the skirt thickness
       7.2 layer type indicator for each layer
       7.3 For each new layer type;
       7.3.1 thickness
       7.3.2 winding (layup) angle
       7.3.3 material type indicator
       8. Material properties for each material type. The skirts
       are fabricated of laminated composite material.
        
       Next, you will see the prompt:
       "Number IZTANK  of rows in the array  ZTANK: IZTANK"
       Want is wanted is the number of axial locations at which
       skirts are to be attached to the propellant tank.
       With long propellant tanks IZTANK should probably be 2
       With spherical or ellipsoidal tanks a choice of IZTANK = 1
       is probably best.
 
 160.1 Number IZTANK  of rows in the array  ZTANK: IZTANK 
 165.1 global axial coordinate of tank support ring: ZTANK
 165.2 
       Must be a positive number. Use the attachment line of the
       tank support ring to the tank as the reference measure, not
       the ring centroidal axis.
       NOTE: IF THERE IS ONLY ONE SKIRT, PUT ZTANK
       AT AN AXIAL STATION NEAR THE LOCATION OF THE TANK C.G.
       ANOTHER NOTE: Do not put the ring exactly at the apex of the
       tank dome. If the ring is in the dome make sure that it is
       some distance from the dome apex. If it is at the apex a
       singularity will occur and the computations will be meaningless.
 
 170.1 global axial coordinate of "ground": ZGRND
 170.2 
       This is the global axial coordinate of the end of a skirt
       that is connected to "ground", that is, the end of a skirt
       that is connected to the launch vehicle, which is assumed
       to be rigid in this study..
 
 
 175.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide the propellant tank
       reinforcement type. A given propellant tank reinforcement
       type is associated with the following "bundle" of properties:
       1. the doubler length and max. thickness: DUBAXL and DUBTHK
       2. the ring cross section properties: ring thickness (TRNGTH),
       ring height (TRNGHI), ring elastic modulus (TRNGE), and
       ring coefficient of thermal expansion (ALRNGT).
 
 180.1 propellant tank reinforcement type: RNGTYP
 180.2 
       The propellant tank reinforcement type is associated with
       the bundle of tapered doubler and discrete ring properties.
 
 
 185.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide the axial lengths of doublers
       associated with each propellant tank support ring. The propellant
       tank end of each skirtt is associated not only with a propellant
       tank support ring but also with a region in the neighborhood
       of this ring where the propellant tank is thicker than elswhere
       because of a tapered doubler added to the outside of the
       propellant tank skin.
        
       You will next see the following prompt:
       "Number IDUBAXL of rows in the array  DUBAXL: IDUBAXL"
       What is wanted is the number of different reinforcement types.
       In most cases IDUBAXL should probably be 1
 
 190.1 Number IDUBAXL of rows in the array  DUBAXL: IDUBAXL
 195.1 axial length of the propellant tank doubler: DUBAXL
 195.2 
       This is the axial length of the axisymmetric doubler
 
 200.1 max.thickness of the propellant tank doubler: DUBTHK
 200.2 
       The tapered doubler is centered at the axial location of
       the propellant tank support ring with which it is associated.
       The maximum thickness, DUBTHK, of the tapered doubler occurs
       at the same axial location as the external discrete ring.
       This is the additional thickness to be added to the nominal
       tank thickness that exists in regions remote from each
       propellant tank support ring. In axial regions where
       tapered doublers exist the BIGBOSOR4 tank wall model has
       three layers: innermost layer = smeared orthogrid; middle
       layer = tank skin of thickness, THKAFT or THKMID or THKFWD;
       outermost layer = tapered doubler.
 
 
 205.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide properties of the
       external rings near which the propellant tank end of the
       support skirts are attached. You will be asked for the
       following:
       TRNGTH = thickness of the propellant tank support ring
       TRNGHI = height of the propellant tank support ring
       You must provide these two properties of the propellant
       tank support rings for each propellant tank reinforcement
       type. The propellant tank support rings have rectangular
       cross sections.
       TRNGE = elastic modulus of the propellant tank support ring
       ALRNGT = coefficient of thermal expansion of the ring
 
 210.1 thickness of the tank reinforcement ring: TRNGTH
 210.2 
       This ring is part of the propellant tank reinforcement
       The propellant tank end of the skirt is attached to the
       tank reference surface at the ring attachment point.
       TRNGTH is the dimension of the ring measured parallel to the
       tank skin. The ring is attached to the outer surface of the
       tank skin. (Not the outer surface of the doubler, but the
       outer surface of the part of the tank skin of thickness
       THKMID.)
 
 215.1 height of the tank reinforcement ring: TRNGHI
 215.2 
       TRNGHI is the dimension of the ring measured normal to the
       tank skin.
 
 220.1 hoop modulus of the tank ring: TRNGE
 220.2 
       The hoop modulus is the stiffness/area of the tank support
       ring in units, for example, of lb/in**2.
 
 225.1 coef.of thermal expansion of the tank ring: ALRNGT
 225.2 
       What is wanted here is the coefficient of thermal radial
       expansion of the propellant tank support ring. The thermal
       radial contraction of each propellant tank support ring is
       included in the stress and buckling analyses of the supporting
       skirts. Units of ALRNGT are "per degree xxx". Use consistent
       units for this quantity and the temperature difference you
       will be asked for below.
 
 
 230.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide some properties of
       the skirts that support the propellant tank. etc.
 
 235.1 Number ISKRTYP of rows in the array  SKRTYP: ISKRTYP
 240.1 skirt type index: SKRTYP
 240.2 
       There can be 1 or 2 skirt types. If there are 2 skirt types
       skirt type 1 is the aft skirt and skirt type 2 is the
       forward skirt.
 
 
 245.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide variables that pertain
       to each type of skirt:
       1. length of one-layered section of the end of the skirt
       that is attached to the propellant tank.
       2. thickness of the one-layered tank-end section where
       the skirt is attached to the propellant tank
       3. length of the multi-layed section of the tank-end of the
       skirt in which there exist exterior metal "prongs" that
       enclose the laminated composite skirt wall.
       4. thickness of the tapered "prongs" at the tank-end junction
       between the one-layered tank-end section and the multi-layered
       tank-end section of the skirt.
       5. length of the one-layered section of the end of the skirt
       that is attached to "ground".
       6. thickness of the one-layered "ground"-end section where
       the skirt is attached to "ground".
       7. length of the multi-layered section of the "ground"-end
       of the skirt in which there exist exterior metal "prongs"
       that enclose the "ground"-end laminated composite skirt wall.
       8. thickness of the tapered "pprongs" at the "ground"-end
       junction between the one-layered "ground"-end seciotn and
       the multi-layered "ground"-end section of the skirt.
 
 250.1 tank-end length of one-layered skirt part: LNGTNK1
 250.2 
       explain
 
 255.1 tank-end thickness of tapered skirt part: THKTNK1
 255.2 
       explain
 
 260.1 tank-end length of tapered prongs: LNGTNK2
 260.2 
       explain
 
 265.1 tank-end thickness of one tapered prong: THKTNK2
 265.2 
       explain
 
 270.1 "ground" end length of one-layered skirt part: LNGVEH1
 270.2 
       explain
 
 275.1 "ground"-end thickness of tapered skirt part: THKVEH1
 275.2 
       explain
 
 280.1 "ground"-end length of tapered prongs: LNGVEH2
 280.2 
       explain
 
 285.1 "ground"-end thickness of one tapered prong: THKVEH2
 285.2 
       explain
 
 
 290.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide some properties of
       the skirts that support the propellant tank. etc.
 
 
 295.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide an index for
       the type of wall construction (type of composite laminate)
       associated with the skirt type, SKRTYP.
       Skirts at different propellant tank rings may have
       different composite layups, that is, different wall types.
 
 300.1 type of wall constructions in skirt type SKRTYP: WALTYP
 300.2 
       Probably the skirts at different axial levels will have
       different wall types, that is, different composite layups.
 
 
 305.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide thickness types,
       layup angle types, and material types. These quantities
       are the "building blocks" of the laminated composite walls
       that form the skirts.
       THICK = thickness corresponding to a layer index
       ANGLE = layup angle corresponding to a layer index
       MATTYP = material type corresponding to a layer index.
       THICK, ANGLE, and MATTYP form a triad that corresponds
       to a given layer index.
       The layer indices are stored in a matrix, LAYTYP(i,j),
       in which i = the layer number in a laminate and j = a
       wall type number.
        
       You will next see the prompt:
       "Number ITHICK of rows in the array THICK: ITHICK"
       What is wanted is the number of different layer indices
       that point to a unique triad, (THICK,ANGLE,MATTYP). For
       example, suppose you have a laminated composite wall with
       ply layup given by [0,+45,-45,90,90,-45,+45,0]total. In
       this example ITHICK = 4 (4 unique triads) because each of
       the first four layers in the symmetric 8-layered laminate
       has a different layup angle. You would provide the following:
       ITHICK = 4
       THICK(i), i=1,4 = 0.01, 0.01, 0.01, 0.01 (for example, and
       to be provided by you one datum at a time)
       ANGLE(i), i=1.4 = 0., 45., -45., 90. (one datum at a time)
       MATTYP(i),i=1,4 = 1, 1, 1, 1 (one datum at a time)
 
 310.1 Number ITHICK  of rows in the array  THICK: ITHICK 
 315.1 thickness of a lamina: THICK
 315.2 
       It is possible to have multiple adjacent plies of the same
       thickness type (same thickness index).
 
 320.1 layup angle: ANGLE
 320.2 
       Please provide the layup angle in degrees
 
 325.1 Material type: MATTYP
 325.2 
       Thickness, Layup angle, and Material type form a triad that
       corresponds to a layer type, or a layer index. Composite
       laminated walls consist of a group of layer types. The
       thickness and layup angle of the layer type can be selected
       by the user as decision variables. They are called "decision
       variable candidates".
 
 
 330.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide a matrix of layer types
       corresponding to each wall type.
       LAYTYP(ILAYTYP,JLAYTYP) = layer type(layer no., walltype no.)
       Suppose you have the following laminate stacking sequence:
       [0,+45,-45,90,90,-45,+45,0]total. Then, for wall type no. 1
       you would want LAYTYP(i,1) to be as follows:
       LAYTYP(i,1), i=1,8 = 1, 2, 3, 4, 4, 3, 2, 1
        
       You will next see the two prompts:
       "Number JLAYTYP of columns in the array, LAYTYP: JLAYTYP"
       "Number ILAYTYP of rows in this column of LAYTYP: ILAYTYP"
       JLAYTYP is the number of wall types and ILAYTYP is the number
       of layers in the laminate.
       Following the prompts for JLAYTYP and ILAYTYP, you will be
       prompted to provide the layer types, LAYTYP. Corresponding
       to the example of the laminate with 8 layers, you would provide:
       LAYTYP(i,1), i=1,8 = 1, 2, 3, 4, 4, 3, 2, 1
       one datum at a time.
 
 335.1 Number JLAYTYP of columns in the array, LAYTYP: JLAYTYP
 340.1 Number ILAYTYP of rows in this column of LAYTYP: ILAYTYP
 345.1 layer type index: LAYTYP
 345.2 
       For example, LAYTYP(7,3) is the layer index for layer number 7
       wall type number 3. The integer, LAYTYP(i,j) points to a
       specific triad: thickness, layup angle, material type.
 
 
 350.0 
       Next, you will be asked to supply material properties for
       an orthotropic ply of composite material. You will be asked
       to provide the following for each material type:
        
       E1 = modulus in the fiber direction
       E2 = modulus transverse to fibers in the plane of the layey
       G12 = in-plane shear modulus
       NU = Poisson's ratio: NU = NU12 = NU21 x E2/E1
       NOTE: The NU you provide is the smallest of the two if
       E1 > E2. This is a bit unusual, so BEWARE!
       G13 = transverse shear modulus for shear in a plane normal
       to the fibers
       G23 = transverse shear modulus for shear in a plane parallel
       to the fibers.
        
       For an isotropic material just use E1 = E2; G12 = E1/[2(1+NU)]
       G13 = G23 = G12
        
       ALPHA1 = coefficient of thermal expansion along fibers
       ALPHA2 = coefficient of thermal expansion transverse to fibers
       TEMTUR = residual stress temperature (curing delta temperature)
       COND1 = thermal conductivity along fibers
       COND2 = thermal conductivity transverse to fibers
        
       You will next see the prompt:
       "Number IE1     of rows in the array  E1: IE1"
       What is wanted is the number of different material types.
       In the example given above in which there is an 8-layered
       symmetric laminate, there is only one material type, that is,
       MATTYP(i), i=1,4 = 1, 1, 1, 1  In this example you would
       provide IE1 = 1
 
 355.1 Number IE1     of rows in the array  E1: IE1    
 360.1 modulus in the fiber direction: E1
 365.1 modulus transverse to fibers: E2
 370.1 in-plane shear modulus: G12
 375.1 small Poisson's ratio: NU
 375.2 
       This is unusual, so BEWARE! NU is the small Poisson's
       ratio if E1 > E2, which is almost always the case.
       NU = NU12 = NU21 x E2/E1
 
 380.1 x-z out-of-plane shear modulus: G13
 380.2 
       Ths is the transverse shear modulus governing shear stiffness
       normal to the laminate in a plane normal to the fibers. For
       unidirectional tape you might use a value equal to or close
       to the in-plane shear modulus, G12.
 
 385.1 y-z out-of-plane shear modulus: G23
 385.2 
       This is the transverse shear modulus governing shear stiffness
       normal to the laminate in a plane parallel to the fibers. For
       unidirectional tape you might use a value equal or close to
       the in-plane shear modulus, G12.
 
 390.1 coef.of thermal expansion along fibers: ALPHA1
 395.1 coef.of thermal expan.transverse to fibers: ALPHA2
 400.1 curing delta temperature (positive): TEMTUR
 400.2 
       This is the temperature difference between the temperature
       at which the material sets and the ambient (room) temperature,
       that is, the temperature difference that gives rise to residual
       stresses from curing the composite laminate. Use TEMTUR = 0
       if you wish to neglect the effect of curing residual stresses.
 
 405.1 conductivity along the fibers: COND1
 405.2 
       This is the conductivity along the fibers in a unidirectional
       ply of a composite laminate.
 
 410.1 conductivity transverse to fibers: COND2
 410.2 
       This is the conductivity transverse to the fibers in a unidirectional
       ply that is a layer in a composite laminate.
 
 415.1 weight density of the material: DENSTY
 415.2 
       e.g. aluminum = 0.1 lb/in^3
       many composite materials have DENSTY = 0.057 lb/in^3
 
 
 420.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide a variable
       called "WGT". This variable plays a role in the definition
       of the objective:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(normalized empty tank mass)
       + (1.0 - WGT)*(normalized conductance of support system)
       After you provite WGT you will be asked to provide the
       normalizing values of empty tank mass and total
       conductance of all the supporting skirts.
 
 425.1 objective=WGT*(empty tank mass) +(1-WGT)*(conductance): WGT
 425.2 
       WGT is a "weighting" variable by means of which the
       objective is defined.
       In general, the objective is defined as:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(normalized empty tank mass)
       +(1.-WGT)*(normalized total skirt conductance)
       If WGT = 0.0 the objective is given by:
       OBJECTIVE = (total skirt conductance)
       You will next be asked to provide two variables:
       1. TNKNRM = the normalizing quantity for empty tank mass
       2. CONNRM = the normalizing quantity for total skirt conductance
       With WGT > 0.0 the objective will be as follows:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(empty tank mass)/TNKNRM
       +(1.-WGT)*(total skirt conductance)/CONNRM
 
 430.1 normalizing empty tank mass: TNKNRM
 430.2 
       In general, the objective is defined as:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(normalized empty tank mass)
       +(1.-WGT)*(normalized total skirt conductance)
       If WGT = 0.0 the objective is given by:
       OBJECTIVE = (total skirt conductance)
       You will next be asked to provide two variables:
       1. TNKNRM = the normalizing quantity for empty tank mass
       2. CONNRM = the normalizing quantity for total skirt conductance
       With WGT > 0.0 the objective will be as follows:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(empty tank mass)/TNKNRM
       +(1.-WGT)*(total skirt conductance)/CONNRM
 
 435.1 normalizing total skirt conductance: CONNRM
 435.2 
       In general, the objective is defined as:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(normalized empty tank mass)
       +(1.-WGT)*(normalized total skirt conductance)
       If WGT = 0.0 the objective is given by:
       OBJECTIVE = (total skirt conductance)
       You will next be asked to provide the variable:
       CONNRM = the normalizing quantity for total skirt conductance
       With WGT > 0.0 the objective will be as follows:
       OBJECTIVE = WGT*(empty tank mass)/TNKNRM
       +(1.-WGT)*(total skirt conductance)/CONNRM
 
 
 440.0 
       Next, provide the index for mission phase:
       IPHASE = 1 means launch phase
       IPHASE = 2 means orbital phase
       In the orbital phase the conductance is lower than in the
       launch phase because the heat must flow through both the
       launch skirt and the inner orbital skirt assembly in series.
 
 445.1 IPHASE=1=launch phase; IPHASE=2=orbital phase: IPHASE
 445.2 
       help for IPHASE
 
 
 450.0 
       Next, provide the environment seen by the filled propellant
       tank. This environment has the following components:
       1. ullage pressure, PRESS, in the propellant tank
       2. quasi-static axial g-loading in gees, GAXIAL
       3. quasi-static lateral g-loading in gees, GLATRL
       4. propellant tank cool-down in the launch-hold condition
       5. launch vehicle temperature in the launch-hold condition
       6. average cool-down of each skirt in the launch-hold condition
       and during launch
       7. propellant tank cool-down in the orbital condition
       8. launch vehicle temperature in the orbital condition
       9. average cool-down of each skirt in the orbital condition
        
       You will next see the following prompt:
       "Number NCASES  of load cases (environments): NCASES"
       Each case corresponds to a "bundle" of loads: ullage
       pressure, PRESS, axial g-loading, GAXIAL, lateral g-loading,
       GLATRL, and propellant tank cool-down delta temperature,
       TNKCOOL. It is probably best to optimize with NCASES = 2
       For example, in Load Case 1 you might have:
       PRESS = 24, GAXIAL = 10., GLATRL = 0., TNKCOOL = -200
       In load Case 2 you might have:
       PRESS = 24, GAXIAL = 0., GLATRL = 10., TNKCOOL = -200
 
 455.1 Number NCASES  of load cases (environments): NCASES 
 460.1 propellant tank ullage pressure: PRESS
 460.2 
       The propellant tank is internally pressurized in addition
       to the pressure head provided by the propellant.
 
 465.1 quasi-static axial g-loading: GAXIAL
 465.2 
       Provide the ultimate axial g-loading to be seen by the
       propellant tank.
 
 470.1 quasi-static lateral g-loading: GLATRL
 470.2 
       Provide the ultimate resultant lateral g-loading to be seen
       by the propellant tank.
 
 475.1 propellant tank cool-down from cryogen: TNKCOOL
 475.2 
       This is the temperature decrease after the tank has been
       filled with cryogen.
 
 
 480.0 
       The responses (behaviors) include the following:
       1. four vibration modes and frequencies:
       a. axial vibration
       b. rolling vibration
       c. lateral-pitching vibration mode 1
       d. lateral-pitching vibration mode 2
        
       2. maximum stress components in the composite laminates:
       a. maximum tensile stress along the fibers of a ply
       b. maximum compressive stress along the fibers of a ply
       c. maximum tensile stress transverse to the fibers in a ply
       d. maximum compressive stress transverse to the fibers in a ply
       e. maximum in-plane shear stress in a ply
       f. maximum vonMises effective stress if the material is isotropic
        
       3. shell buckling of a skirt
       4. force in a skirt in the launch-hold condition
       5. maximum effective stress in the propellant tank
       6. buckling of the propellant tank
        
       You will next see the prompt:
       "Number JFREQ   of columns in the array, FREQ: JFREQ"
       JFREQ is the number of free vibration frequencies to be
       computed for the tank/skirt system. In this study JFREQ is
       must always be equal to 4   There are two free vibration
       modes corresponding to n = 0 circumferential waves: one
       corresponding to rolling and the other corresponding to
       axial translation of the skirt-supported propellant tank.
       There are two free vibration modes corresponding to n = 1
       circumferential wave: both corresponding to a combination
       of lateral translation and pitching of the propellant tank.
 
 485.1 Number JFREQ   of columns in the array, FREQ: JFREQ  
 490.0 free vibration frequency (cps): FREQ
 490.2 
       Four vibration modes are important:
       1. axial vibration [axisymmetric (n=0) vibration mode]
       2. rolling vibration [axisymmetric (n=0) vibration mode]
       3. lateral-pitching mode 1 (vibration with n = 1 circ. wave)
       4. lateral-pitching mode 2 (vibration with n = 1 circ. wave)
 
 495.1 minimum allowable frequency (cps): FREQA
 495.2 
       Typically the minimum allowable frequency during the launch
       phase of the mission is significantly higher than the minimum
       allowable frequency in orbit.
 
 500.1 factor of safety for freqency: FREQF
 500.2 
       One suggestion would be a factor of safety of something
       like 1.2.
 
 
 505.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide behavioral variables
       relating to stress in the laminated composite skirts.
       For a unidirectional composite ply there are 5 stress
       components that are important:
       1. tensile stress along fibers
       2. compressive stress along fibers
       3. tensile stress transverse to fibers
       4. compressive stress transverse to fibers
       5. in-plane shear stress
       The ply can fail if the allowable stress for any one
       or more of these stress components is exceeded.
        
       You will next see the prompt:
       "Number JSTRES1 of columns in the array, STRES1: JSTRES1"
       What is wanted is the number of stress components, which
       must always be 5 in this GENOPT application. Enter "5"
       when you are presented with this prompting phrase.
 
 510.1 Number JSTRES1 of columns in the array, STRES1: JSTRES1
 515.0 maximum stress in material 1: STRES1
 515.2 
       The six possible stress components are:
       1. tensile stress along fibers
       2. compressive stress along fibers
       3. tensile stress transverse to fibers
       4. compressive stress transverse to fibers
       5. in-plane shear stress
       6. vonMises effective stress (in isotropic material)
 
 520.1 maximum allowable stress in material 1: STRES1A
 525.1 factor of safety for stress, matl 1: STRES1F
 525.2 
       Generally use a factor of safety between 1.0 and 1.5.
 
 530.0 maximum stress in material 2: STRES2
 530.2 
       In an analogous manner to the behavior, STRES1, there are
       six component of stress in the array, STRES2. The only
       difference here is that we are concerned with material type
       2 instead of material type 1.
 
 535.1 maximum allowable stress in material 2: STRES2A
 540.1 factor of safety for stress, matl 2: STRES2F
 540.2 
       Generally use a factor of safety between 1.0 and 1.5.
 
 
 545.0 
       Next, you will be asked to provide a behavioral variable
       relating to buckling of the laminated composite skirts.
        
       You will next see the prompt:
       "Number JSHLBUK of columns in the array, SHLBUK: JSHLBUK"
       What is wanted is the number of skirt supports.
 
 550.1 Number JSHLBUK of columns in the array, SHLBUK: JSHLBUK
 555.0 buckling of skirt as a shell: SHLBUK
 555.2 
       The shell buckling mode of the skirt may be a short-
       axial-wavelength mode. The critical shell buckling
       mode usually has multiple waves around the
       circumference of the skirt.
 
 560.1 allowable for shell buckling of skirt: SHLBUKA
 560.2 
       Always set SHLBUKA = 1.0
 
 565.1 factor of safety for shell buckling of skirt: SHLBUKF
 565.2 
       Generally use a factor of safety of about 2.0 in order to
       account for the inevitable presence of initial
       imperfections in the skirt.
 
 570.0 launch-hold force in a skirt: FORCE
 570.2 
       During lauch-hold a compound skirt, that is, a skirt that
       has both a launch wall and a "folded" orbital wall, has a
       "disconnect" feature (a gap) that must remain open during
       the launch-hold phase and during the orbital phase of a
       mission. If FORCE is less than the allowable force, then
       this gap remains open, and the conductance of heat into the
       propellant tank from the launch vehicle remains small.
 
 575.1 maximum allowable launch-hold force in skirt: FORCEA
 575.2 
       Consult the maker of "disconnect" skirts for what the
       maximum allowable launch-hold/orbital FORCE should be.
 
 580.1 factor of safety for launch-hold force: FORCEF
 580.2 
       Generally use a factor of safety between 1.0 and 1.5.
 
 585.0 maximum stress in the propellant tank: TNKSTR
 585.2 
       It is assumed here that the propellant tank is made of
       isotropic material with a single layer in the shell wall.
 
 590.1 allowable for propellant tank stress: TNKSTRA
 590.2 
       Conult the experts for what this maximum allowable stress
       should be.
 
 595.1 factor of safety for tank stress: TNKSTRF
 595.2 
       Use a factor of safety between 1.0 and 2.0
 
 600.0 propellant tank buckling load factor: TNKBUK
 600.2 
       The propellant tank can buckle in various ways:
       1. Buckling of the internally pressurized ellipsoidal
       dome at the bottom of the propellant tank
       2. Buckling due to local compressive membrane stresses in
       the neighborhoods of where the skirts "poke at" the
       propellant tank.
 
 605.1 allowable for propellant tank buckling: TNKBUKA
 605.2 
       Always set TNKBUKA = 1.0
 
 610.1 factor of safety for tank buckling: TNKBUKF
 610.2 
       Generally use a factor of safety between 1.0 and 1.2
 
 
 615.0 
       In this study the objective is a weighted average of the
       normalized empty tank mass and the normalized total conductance:
       objective = WGTxTOTMAS/TNKNRM +(1-WGT)xCONDCT/CONNRM
       in which TOTMAS is the empty tank mass, TNKNRM is a user-
       provided normalizing empty tank mass, CONDCT is the total
       conductance of heat into the propellant tank and CONNRM is
       the normalizing total conductance.
       This compound objective is to be minimized subject to the
       responses (behaviors) identified previously.
 
 620.0 WGTxTOTMAS/TNKNRM +(1-WGT)xCONDCT/CONNRM: CONDCT
 999.0 DUMMY ENTRY TO MARK END OF FILE
